ADR 111: `nop` Mempool (#1585)
cometbft/cometbft: docs/architecture/adr-111-nil-mempool.md

> # ADR 111: `nil` Mempool

Reviewer: Would it not be better to call this "Application-side mempool", given that that's the ultimate implication of this change?

Or is there some other way of emphasizing that that's the ultimate impact of this ADR?

Reviewer 2: `abci` mempool ?

Author: The problem I have with "Application-side mempool", is that, for instance, what the SDK implemented in `v0.47.x` is also an "Application-side mempool", but (ATM) it does require a non-`nil` mempool on CometBFT's side.
I like like `nil`-mempool (or `null`-mempool, or stubbed mempool) as it points to what we are doing in CometBFT (not what the App can/must do when using our `nil`-mempool).

## Changelog

- 2023-11-07: First version (@sergio-mena)

## Status

Accepted | Rejected | Deprecated | Superseded by

## Context

> ### In the Beginning...

Reviewer: I'd recommend putting all this content under the Detailed Design section, and have a very brief overview/summary here under Context. That could be another good opportunity to emphasize how the impact here is to fully enable app-side mempools.

Author: I'll add a short section on top of this one with a brief overview, as you suggest. But I'll leave this here, as it is context (not design)

Since inception, Tendermint Core and later on CometBFT have featured a mempool
as an internal piece of its architecture.
It is well understood that a dissemination mechanism
(sometimes using _Reliable Broadcast_ [\[HT94\]][HT94] but not necessarily),
is needed in a distributed system implementing State-Machine Replication (SMR).
This is also the case in blockchains.
Early designs such as Bitcoin or Ethereum include an _internal_ component,
responsible for dissemination, called mempool.
Tendermint Core chose to follow the same design given the success
of those early blockchains.

However, the design of ABCI clearly dividing the application logic (i.e., the appchain)

> and the consensus logic that provides SMR semantics to the app is a unique innovation in Cosmos

Author: I'd rather not introduce the p2p part here, as it doesn't add anything necessary to the reasoning going on here (all mentioned blockchains have some form of gossiping at the network level, so CometBFT is not _set apart_ in that respect)

that sets it apart from Bitcoin, Ethereum, and many others.
This clear separation of concerns entailed many consequences, mostly positive:
it allows CometBFT to be used underneath (currently) tens of different appchains in production
in the Cosmos ecosystem and elsewhere.
But there are other implications for having an internal mempool
in CometBFT: the interaction between the mempool, the application, and the network
becomes more indirect, and thus more complex and hard to understand and operate.

### ABCI++ Improvements and Remaining Shortcomings

Before the release of ABCI++, `CheckTx` was the main mechanism the app had at its disposal to influence

> what made it to the mempool, and very indirectly what transactions got ultimately proposed in a block.

Author: ```suggestion
what transactions made it to the mempool, and very indirectly what transactions got ultimately proposed in a block.
```

Since ABCI 1.0 (the first part of ABCI++, shipped in `v0.37.x`), the application now has
a say in what is proposed with `PrepareProposal` and `ProcessProposal`.

This has greatly improved the ability for appchains to influence the contents of proposed block.
Further, it has enabled many new use cases for appchains. However some issues remain with
the current model:

* We are using the same p2p network for disseminating transactions and consensus-related messages.
* Many mempool parameters are configured on a per-node basis by node operators,
  allowing the possibility of inconsistent mempool configuration across the network
  with potentially serious scalability effects
  (even causing unacceptable performance degradation in some extreme cases).

> * The mempool is using a basic (robust but suboptimal) flood algorithm

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The current mempool implementation uses a basic (robust but sub-optimal) flood algorithm
```

>   * the CometBFT team are working on improving it as one of our current priorities,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * the CometBFT team is working on improving it as one of our current priorities,
```

    but any improvement we come up with must address the needs of a vast spectrum of applications,
    as well as be heavily scaled-tested in various scenarios
    (in an attempt to cover the applications' wide spectrum)
  * a mempool designed specifically for one particular application
    would reduce the search space as its designers can devise it with just their application's
    needs in mind.
* The interaction with the application is still somewhat convoluted:

>   * the app has to decide what logic to implement in `CheckTx`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * the application has to decide what logic to implement in `CheckTx`,
```

just making it consistent to ensure we are talking about the same thing :wink:

    what to do with the transaction list coming in `RequestPrepareProposal`,
    whether it wants to maintain an app-side mempool (more on this below), and whether or not
    to combine the transactions in the app-side mempool with those coming in `RequestPrepareProposal`

>   * all those combinations are hard to fully understand, as the semantics and guarantees are
>     often not clear

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * All those combinations are difficult to fully comprehend due to unclear semantics and guarantees.
```

  * when using exclusively an app-mempool (the approach taken in the Cosmos SDK `v0.47.x`)
    for populating proposed blocks, with the aim of simplifying the app developers' life,
    we still have a suboptimal model where we need to continue using CometBFT's mempool
    in order to disseminate the transactions. So, we end up using twice as much memory,
    as in-transit transactions need to be kept in both mempools.

The approach presented in this ADR builds on the app-mempool design released in `v0.47.x`
of the Cosmos SDK,
and briefly discussed in the last bullet point above (see [SDK app-mempool][sdk-app-mempool] for further details of this model).

In the app-mempool design in Cosmos SDK `v0.47.x`
an unconfirmed transaction must be both in CometBFT's mempool for dissemination and
in the app's mempool so the application can decide how to manage the mempool.

> The many advantages of this approach are beyond question. However it has some implications:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is no doubt that this approach has numerous advantages. However, it also has some implications that need to be considered:
```

* Having every transaction both in CometBFT and in the application is suboptimal in terms of memory.
  Additonally, the app developer has to be careful
  that the contents of both mempools does not diverge over time
  (hence the crucial role `re-CheckTx` plays post-ABCI++).
* The main reason for a transaction needing to be in CometBFT's mempool is
  because the design in Cosmos SDK `v0.47.x` does not consider an application
  that has its own means of disseminating transactions.
  It reuses the peer to peer network underneath CometBFT reactors.

> * So, if an app has an ad-hoc design of how to disseminate transactions,
>   there is no point in having transactions in CometBFT's mempool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* There is no point in having transactions in CometBFT's mempool if an application implements an ad-hoc design of disseminating transactions.
```

> This proposal targets this kind of applications:
> those that have an ad-hoc (and likely more efficient) mechanism for transaction dissemination.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This proposal targets this kind of applications that have an ad-hoc (and likely more efficient) mechanism for transaction dissemination.
```

We propose to introduce a `nil` mempool which will effectively act as a stubbed object
internally:

* it will reject any transaction being locally submitted or gossipped by a peer

> * when it is time to _reap_ (as it is currently called) the mempool the answer will always be empty

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* when a _reap_ (as it is currently called) is executed in the mempool, an empty answer will always be returned
```

* the application running on the proposer validator will add transactions it received

>   using the appchains's own mechanism via `PrepareProposal`.

Reviewer 3: should we re-phrase `appchains's own mechanism` adding `add-mempool` since that's the term it was described before ?

Author: Do you mean `app-mempool`?
If you do, I'd rather keep it general and not hint at one possible appchain mechanism (which is what an app mempool is)

## Alternative Approaches

These are the alternatives known to date:

1. Keep the current model. Useful for basic apps, but clearly suboptimal for applications
   with their own mechanism to disseminate transactions and particular performance requirements.

> 2. Provide more efficient general-purpose mempool implementations.

Reviewer 3: Should we mention the CAT mempool here ? It's a good example of a new design that has been some R&D, testing, validation to ensure a different approach is a better alternative

>    This is an ongoing effort, but will take some time (and R&D effort) to come up with

Author: ```suggestion
   This is an ongoing effort (e.g., [CAT mempool](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/1472)), but will take some time (and R&D effort) to come up with
```

>    advanced mechanisms -- likely highly configurable -- which then will have to be thoroughly tested.

Author: ```suggestion
   advanced mechanisms -- likely highly configurable and thus complex -- which then will have to be thoroughly tested.
```

3. A similar approach to this one ([ADR110][adr-110]) whereby the application-specific

>    mechanism directly interacts with CometBFT via a newly defined gRPC interface.

Reviewer 4: Publicly exposed broadcast tx on the validator mode is a Dos vulnerability. Level 1 is not secure.

>    mechanism directly interacts with CometBFT via a newly defined gRPC interface.

Author: Level 1. If CometBFT's transactions are not gossiped by any full node, what is the point in having them on CometBFT's mempool? I mean, it's still gonna have all the interaction/config problems we have today (e.g., CometBFT not providing _all_ TX in `PrepProp` in some circumstances; what limits should the operator set on the mempool's capacity, etc). Also, the app will only learn about new TXs at `PrepProp` time, so it's only at that moment its own dissemination mechanism can kick in.
Level 2. Yes, this is the mechanism that allows us to say somewhere in this ADR that we're not offering anything that can't already be done with latest CometBFT version, but we're improving UX. I'll try to include your text here on one such reference to "nothing new, just better UX".

## Decision

TBD

## Detailed Design

What this ADR proposes can already be achieved with an unmodified CometBFT since `v0.37.x`,
albeit with a complex, poor UX.
This core of this proposal is to make some internal changes so it is clear an simple for app developers,
thus improving the UX.

#### `nil` Mempool

We propose a new mempool implementation, called `nil` Mempool, that effectively disables all mempool functionality
within CometBFT.
The `nil` Mempool implements the `Mempool` interface in a very simple manner:

> 

Reviewer 3: Did we confirm that all these returns on the `nil` mempool will not cause any side effects or undesirable behaviours ? From what I read the idea of going with this model is that would not required any extra changes except on the interface implementation level.

Author: To the extent that I crawled back all callsites by hand and convinced myself there'll be no extra changes in other parts of the code.
But, when implementing, we might find something unexpected that might require this ADR to be updated (as we usually do).

*	`CheckTx(tx types.Tx) (*abcicli.ReqRes, error)`: returns `nil, ErrNotAllowed`
*	`RemoveTxByKey(txKey types.TxKey) error`: returns `ErrNotFound`
* `ReapMaxBytesMaxGas(maxBytes, maxGas int64) types.Txs`: returns `nil`

> * `ReapMaxTxs(max int) types.Txs`: returns `nil`

Reviewer 5: Instead of returning `nil`, could return an empty slice, matching the behavior in `flood`

Author: I just quickly re-checked the call-site, and it doesn't make any difference.

*	`Lock()`: does nothing
* `Unlock()`: does nothing
*	`Update(...) error`: returns `nil`
* `FlushAppConn() error`: returns `nil`
*	`Flush()`: does nothing
* `TxsAvailable() <-chan struct{}`: returns a closed channel
* `EnableTxsAvailable()`: does nothing
* `SetTxRemovedCallback(cb func(types.TxKey))`: does nothing
* `Size() int` returns 0

> * `SizeBytes() int64` returns 0

Reviewer 6: I have a similar comment on the other ADR regarding the mempool, should we still allow  for some of these endpoints to return info to a user by checking whether the application provides implementation of those?

Also these functions are also accessed via RPC and we are not discussing in the ADR what happens to those RPC endpoints (if anything).

Author: Good point on not mentioning the RPC, will add a section.
To answer your question, my current understanding is that no code, except the (new) implementation of the `Mempool` interface will be changed/added (well, also the logic needed to be able to configure which mempool we will be using). So, the behavior of RPCs will be consistent with that model (size-related RPC methods will call the `Mempool` interface and thus return 0.

Upon startup, the `nil` mempool reactor will advertise no channels to the peer to peer layer.

### Configuration

We propose the following changes to the `config.toml` file:

```toml
[mempool]
# The type of mempool for this CometBFT node to use.
#
# Valid types of mempools supported by CometBFT:

> # - "flood" : clist mempool with flooding gossip protocol (default)

Reviewer 2: local (or a similar word) would be my preference because

a) I doubt that CometBFT will have more than one mempool implementation in the future,
b) devs/operators usually don't know/care about the concrete mechanics (either it's point-to-point, gossip, or something else). I.e., I see some operators confused about flood option if they didn't read the docs

Author: Not fully convinced (we might at CAT mempool land in the next weeks/months) but will change it to "local" as you folks seem to have a strong opinion on this one.

Reviewer 2: > The type of mempool is not the same as the gossip protocol used by the mempool (if any)

💯 

> Not fully convinced (we might have CAT mempool landing on `main` in the next weeks/months) but will change it to "local" as you folks seem to have a strong opinion on this one.

Hmm, in that case, let's stick with `flood` or `clist` (`type CListMempool struct`) because of ^

> # - "flood" : clist mempool with flooding gossip protocol (default)

Author: ```suggestion
# - "local" : clist mempool with flooding gossip protocol (default)
```

Reviewer 7: "local" sounds unclear. Does it refer to the mempool implementation being built-in, as opposed to out-of-process?

> # - "nil"   : nil-mempool (app needs an alternative tx dissemination mechanism)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# - "nil"   : nil-mempool (app has implemented an alternative tx dissemination mechanism)
```

type = "nil"
```

> The config validation logic will be modified to add a new rule that rejects a configuration file if:

Reviewer 8: It's quite obvious in the context of the ADR, but perhaps worth clarifying a little bit that both conditions need to be met for the configuration to be rejected:

```suggestion
The config validation logic will be modified to add a new rule that rejects a configuration file if all of these conditions are met:
```

Reviewer 8: Can we maybe also add a one-line explanation for why `create_empty_block` must be set to `true` with the nil mempool?

Author: Will do

* the mempool is set to `nil`

> * `create_empty_blocks`, in `consensus` section, is set to `false`.

Reviewer 6: Are we sure that there are not applications who will not require empty blocks to be enabled? If not, do we have a way of providing support for this behaviour without erroring? How would such a scenario look?

Reviewer 6: Ah I just realized from context that this should in fact be `true` ?

Author: Yes. Remember that, in previous team discussions:
* we struggled to see why a successful blockchain (and more generally an application under SMR) would need to temporarily stop consensus instances
* we realized the negative impact that temporarily stopping consensus instances had on other parts of CometBFT (e.g., having to wait for a block's apphash, which coming in the next block in order to be able to check proofs)

> * `create_empty_blocks`, in `consensus` section, is set to `false`.

Reviewer 9: I believe the reasoning here is because there is not a way to signify to comet to produce another block otherwise. Could we add a short sentence or two explaining this to avoid confusion for future readers.

### Impacted Workflows

* *Submitting a transaction*. Users are not to submit transactions via CometBFT's RPC.

>   `BroadcastTx*` RPC methods will fail.

Reviewer 3: How is the impact of this ? From a client's perspective (eg. wallets) how do they determine if they can submit a tx via `BroadcastTx` or not, is that based on the mempool configuration ?

Reviewer 6: We should offer a meaningful return method that this does not work. However, this endpoint is still open to attacks , needlessly perhaps so it can be disabled?

Reviewer 3: I believe It might be possible to add a condition that remove this route from the RPC, not as easy as what we did with the new gRPC but I think it is doable and I would prefer that we enforce things more than have expectations that people will not use it (or abuse) in the scenario that it should not be available

Reviewer 9: instead of denying the rpc, id propose a short term solution of fire and forget. users can still submit via 26657 but checktx will fire and potentially not wait for the response, or discard the response. The reason is that that cosmjs puts a hard requirement on using tendermints rpc instead of the apps, this could cause lots of breakage for wallets and other clients

Author: > is that based on the mempool configuration ?

Yes. Probably the error returned should be explicit about that _errored_ (e.g. "nil-mempool configured, which does not accept transactions")

> it can be disabled?
That is another option. Will mention it in the text

> The reason is that that cosmjs puts a hard requirement on using tendermints rpc instead of the apps, this could cause lots of breakage for wallets and other clients

Then they should not configure the nil-mempool until they've remove that requirement. If we return a silent response, the wallets, etc. will stay broken, as the behavior they're expecting won't materialize.
Don't forget that the proposal on this ADR is additive and _not_ the default config (the default is still the current mempool).

Reviewer 2: I'm also against the silent responses and think we should return https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/501

Reviewer: > Then they should not configure the nil-mempool until they've removed that requirement.

+1

> I'm also against the silent responses and think we should return https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/501

Agreed. Technically the mechanism by which transactions _should_ be submitted when the nil mempool is enabled is via an API exposed by the application, executing `CheckTx` prior to insertion in the mempool.

The Cosmos SDK has an opportunity here to set the standard for such an API.

  `RequestPrepareProposal` will thus contain no transactions.
* *Consensus waiting for transactions to become available*. `TxsAvailable()` returns a closed channel,
  so consensus doesn't block (potentially producing empty blocks).
  At any rate, a configuration with the `nil` mempool and `create_empty_blocks` set to `false`
  will be rejected at the first place.
* *A new block is decided*.
  * When `Update` is called, nothing is done (no decided transaction is removed).
  * Locking and unlocking the mempool has no effect.

### Impact on Current Release Plans

The changes needed for this approach, are fairly simple, and the logic is clear.
This might allow us to even deliver it as part of CometBFT `v1` (our next release)
even without a noticeable impact on `v1`'s delivery schedule.

The CometBFT team (learning from past dramatic events) usually takes a conservative approach
for backporting changes to release branches that have already undergone a full QA cycle
(and thus are in code-freeze mode).
For this reason, although the limited impact of these changes would limit the risks

> of backporting to `v0.38.x` and `v0.37.x`, a careful risk/benefit evaluation will

Reviewer 6: backport to `v0.38.x-experimental` ? Or as an opt-in?

Author: That's part of the discussion we'll need to have, and which I'd like to keep out of the scope of this ADR.

have to be carried out.

Backporting to `v0.34.x` does not make sense as this version predates the release of `ABCI 1.0`,
so using the `nil` mempool renders CometBFT's operation useless.

> >TODO: Need to add a small section here explaining the dilemma between a Consensus Param and a

Author: That's the point of my TODO. Bear with me while I work on the text

>      `config.toml` field.

## Consequences

### Positive

- Applications can now find mempool mechanisms that fit better their particular needs:
  - Ad-hoc ways to add, remove, merge, reorder, modify, prioritize transactions according
    to application needs.
  - A way to disseminate transactions (gossip-based or other) to get the submitted transactions
    to proposers. The application developers can devise simpler, efficient mechanisms tailored
    to their application.
  - Back-pressure mechanisms to prevent malicious users from abusing the transaction
    dissemination mechanism.

> - In this approach, CometBFT's peer-to-peer layer does not need to deal with transaction gossipping,
>   and its resources can be used by other reactors such as consensus, evidence,
>   block-sync, or state-sync.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- In this approach, CometBFT's peer-to-peer layer is relieved from managing transaction gossip, freeing up its resources for other reactors such as consensus, evidence, block-sync, or state-sync.
```

> - There is no risk for the operators of a network to provide inconsistent configurations

Reviewer 3: One scenario not clear to me is that if the application implements its ad-hoc mechanism, and some operators configured the `nil` mempool but others might not configure it (e.g. configure the CometBFT regular one). Will that cause any issues ? I think it should be OK because the app should handle the transaction dissemination, but just wondering if there are possible scenarios where a mis-configuration would cause side-effects or issues.

Reviewer 2: Good point 👍 We must ensure the node doesn't panic when receiving a slice of transactions via the p2p network.

`RequestPrepareProposal` will contain a list of transactions in such case, but as long as the app ignores it and uses a custom mempool, it should be okay.

Author: The way I see it, in this particular case, there will be a risk of wasting resources by those nodes that have a misconfigured mempool (bandwidth, CPU, memory, etc) if they are submitted TXs via CometBFT's RPC.
It could get nasty, if there are TXs submitted (incorrectly) via CometBFT's RPC, but those TXs are never submitted (correctly) to the App. As those TXs risk being there for a long time.

## Detailed Design

What this ADR proposes can already be achieved with an unmodified CometBFT since `v0.37.x`,
albeit with a complex, poor UX (see the last alternative in section [Alternative Approaches](#alternative-approaches)).

> This core of this proposal is to make some internal changes so it is clear an simple for app developers,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The core of this proposal is to make some internal changes so it is clear an simple for app developers,
```

### Negative

- With the `nop` mempool, it is up to the application to provide users with a way
  to submit transactions and deliver those transactions to validators.
  This is a considerable endeavor, and more basic appchains may consider it is not worth the hassle.
- There is a risk of wasting resources by those nodes that have a misconfigured
  mempool (bandwidth, CPU, memory, etc). If there are TXs submitted (incorrectly)
  via CometBFT's RPC, but those TXs are never submitted (correctly via an
  app-specific interface) to the App. As those TXs risk being there until the node
  is stopped. Moreover, those TXs will be replied & proposed every single block.
  App developers will need to keep this in mind and panic on `CheckTx` or

>   `PrepareProposal` with non-empty list of transactions.

Author: Can you add a further disadvantage (it slipped through my mind) saying that optimizing block proposals by only including transaction IDs (e.g. TX hashes) is now more difficult as the mempool is outside CometBFT? (For context, this is one of the optimizations we have in mind for bandwidth).
TBH, the app could do it by submitting TX hashes (rather than TXs themselves) in prepare proposal, and then having a mechanism for pulling TXs from the network upon `FinalizeBlock`.
